# schmitz_r-lymphocyte_activation

#Optical metabolic imaging successfully classifies primary human lymphocyte activation

#Contents:
* updated_b_analysis.py
* updated_nk_analysis.py
* updated_all_analysis.py
* b_heatmap.R
* nk_heatmap.R
* allcell_hmap.R

#Dataset list:
* **NK data 2 groups.csv** - Single-cell OMI data for CD69+ activated and CD69- control NK cells.
* **NK data all groups.csv** - Single-cell OMI data for NK cells in all four combinations of activation status (CD69-/CD69+) and culture condition (activated/control)
* **NK_heatmap.csv** - Contents of NK data 2 groups.csv, but formatted for ease of use in R with the ComplexHeatmap package.
    * Activation: 0 = CD69- control, 1 = CD69+ activated
    * Donor: 4 = Donor D, 5 = Donor E, 6 = Donor F
* **Bcell_cyto_2group.csv** - Single-cell OMI data for CD69+ activated and CD69- control B-cells.
* **Bcell_cyto_data.csv** - Single-cell OMI data for B-cells in all four combinations of activation status (CD69-/CD69+) and culture condition (activated/control)
* **B_heatmap.csv** - Contents of Bcell_cyto_2group.csv, but formatted for ease of use in R with the ComplexHeatmap package.
    * Activation: 0 = CD69- control, 1 = CD69+ activated
    * Donor: 1 = Donor A, 2 = Donor B, 3 = Donor C
* **AllCellData.csv** - Single-cell OMI data for CD69+ activated and CD69- control cells from all three cell types (NK, B, T)
* **AllCellData_hmap.csv** - Contents of AllCellData.csv, but formatted for ease of use in R with the ComplexHeatmap package.
    * Activation: 0 = CD69- control, 1 = CD69+ activated
    * Cell Type: 0 = B-cells, 1 = NK cells, 2 = T-cells
    * Donor: 1-6 same as above, 7 = Donor G, 8 = Donor H, 9 = Donor I, 10 = Donor J, 11 = Donor K, 12 = Donor L

#Software Requirements:
_Python 3.8:_
* holoviews 1.14.8
* numpy 1.20.3
* pandas 1.3.3
* scikit-learn 0.24.2
* umap-learn 0.5.3

_R 4.1.0:_
* RStudio 1.4.1717
* circlize 0.4.14
* ComplexHeatmap 2.10.0
* ggplot2 3.3.5
* RColorBrewer 1.1-3


#Instructions:

**updated_B_analysis.py**
_Generates UMAPs and random forest classifiers for B-cell data._

Required files: 
* Bcell_cyto_2group.csv
* Bcell_cyto_data.csv

Steps:
1.	Load file into Python IDE of choice (this code was written in Spyder 4.2.5)
2.	Run section 1 to import required packages
3.	Run section 2 to set-up for ROC curve generation 
4.	Run section 3 to read in Bcell_cyto_2group.csv, which contains single-cell OMI data from the CD69- control and CD69+ activated B-cells. 
5.	B-cell activation status classification:
    * In section 4, change line 82 to contain the desired OMI parameters used in the classifier. The code is written to have all 10 features, but can be changed to have any combination of features. 
    * Make sure that ‘Activation’ is the last parameter in the list in line 82.
    * Run Section 4, which will produce a confusion matrix, list of feature weights, an ROC curve, and metrics for assessing the performance of the classifier (accuracy, recall, precision, f1 score).
6.	B-cell OMI UMAPs of CD69- control and CD69+ activated B-cells: 
    * Sections 5-7 produce UMAPs from Bcell_cyto_2group.csv. All three sections use the same overall structure to generate the UMAP.
        * Section 5: UMAP color-coded by activation
        * Section 6: UMAP color-coded by donor
        * Section 7: UMAP color-coded by both activation and donor.
    * The UMAPs used in the paper figures can be generated by running this code as-is. 
    * To alter the parameters of the UMAP or plotting in Section 5:
        * UMAP input parameters such as n_neighbors, min_dist, etc. can be altered in lines 126 - 132.
        * Factor used to determine color-coding is set by legend_entries in line 140.
    * Similar alterations can be done in Sections 6 & 7 by locating and changing the same sections of code. 
7.  B-cell OMI UMAPs of all four combinations of activation status (CD69-/CD69+) and culture condition (activated/control):
    * Run Section 8 as-is to produce the UMAP used in the paper figures
    * To alter the parameters of the UMAP or plotting:
        * UMAP input parameters such as n_neighbors, min_dist, etc. can be altered in lines 342 - 348.
        * Factor used to determine color-coding is set by legend_entries in line 355.

**updated_nk_analysis.py**
_Generates UMAPs and random forest classifiers for  NK cell data._

Required files: 
* NK data 2 groups.csv
* NK data all groups.csv

Steps:
1.	Load file into Python IDE of choice (this code was written in Spyder 4.2.5)
2.	Run section 1 to import required packages
3.	Run section 2 to set-up for ROC curve generation 
4.	Run section 3 to read in NK data 2 groups.csv, which contains single-cell OMI data from the CD69- control and CD69+ activated NK cells. 
5.	NK cell activation status classification:
    * In section 4, change line 75 to contain the desired OMI parameters used in the classifier. The code is written to have all 10 features, but can be changed to have any combination of features. 
    * Make sure that ‘Activation’ is the last parameter in the list in line 75.
    * Run Section 4, which will produce a confusion matrix, list of feature weights, an ROC curve, and metrics for assessing the performance of the classifier (accuracy, recall, precision, f1 score).
6.	NK cell OMI UMAPs of CD69- control and CD69+ activated NK cells: 
    * Sections 5-7 produce UMAPs from NK data 2 groups.csv. All three sections use the same overall structure to generate the UMAP.
        * Section 5: UMAP color-coded by activation
        * Section 6: UMAP color-coded by donor
        * Section 7: UMAP color-coded by both activation and donor.
    * The UMAPs used in the paper figures can be generated by running this code as-is. 
    * To alter the parameters of the UMAP or plotting in Section 5:
        * UMAP input parameters such as n_neighbors, min_dist, etc. can be altered in lines 118 - 126.
        * Factor used to determine color-coding is set by legend_entries in line 140.
    * Similar alterations can be done in Sections 6 & 7 by locating and changing the same sections of code. 
1.  NK cell OMI UMAPs of all four combinations of activation status (CD69-/CD69+) and culture condition (activated/control):
    * Run Section 8 as-is to produce the UMAP used in the paper figures
    * To alter the parameters of the UMAP or plotting:
        * UMAP input parameters such as n_neighbors, min_dist, etc. can be altered in lines 336-342.
        * Factor used to determine color-coding is set by legend_entries in line 349.

**